what I see happening on YouTube today is
illustrated very well by this photograph
now how did I even find this photograph
I don't play any of these video games
none of this is part of my life I don't
own a Nintendo switch but the one video
you see there that got 27,000 views in
less than two days that video was
recommended to me by YouTube and there
were no politics involved here that's
not a political issue and there's
nothing sexy about the video or its
thumbnail it doesn't have a it's not
like this one video has a woman in a
bikini in it and there are no other
factors here okay why was this video
advertised to me I've never seen this
channel before I've never heard this
guy's name before it wasn't a paid
advertisement why did this appear on the
front page of YouTube for me and not any
of his other videos one of the strangest
and most persistent myths on the
Internet
is the idea that success arises
spontaneously and anonymously that can
happen to anyone at any time sort of
like lightning striking you when you
walk through a field and obviously in a
subjective and emotional sense it must
sometimes feel this way somebody uploads
a video when it it just seems that for
no reason at all becomes a smash yet
it's become very common both in the
political critique of YouTube and in the
sort of positive celebration of YouTube
to claim that videos rising to public
prominence is the result of an algorithm
a depersonalized automatic computational
system of numbers programmed into a
computer somewhere I'd invite you just
pause for a minute before we go further
in this video and reflect on how rarely
in your own life you used to use the
word algorithm just a few years ago
people started saying this all the time
about the internet now not everything on
the internet is created and controlled
by an impersonal algorithm a very large
part of what we perceive and
Seve on the internet is curated content
and that just means a human being
somewhere in an office sitting at a
computer made the decision about what
would and would not appear in your
Facebook feed in your Twitter feed on
the front page of YouTube right and I
think that we're all playing a game of
collective self-deception in imagining
that these things are decided by an
algorithm now really brief parallelism
to what's going on in YouTube today
there was a pretty short period maybe
two years maximum when the website
tumblr was really popping was really
popular I would say it was maybe even
six months when it was really super
super successful and in tumblr there
were a number of hashtags they didn't
they don't really operate the same way
as a hashtag on Twitter or they didn't
at that time when you put in a Tash tag
at that time on the website you would
get a category and then a listing of new
things being posted to that category and
one of them was like humor another one
was a black-and-white just for
black-and-white photography and what I
found out to my surprise that looked
into it was that many of these hashtags
were curated and they had an active
program whereby there be just one or two
employees of the company who would then
select people just normal people use the
the website they would select people to
be curators on a volunteer basis so
basically you started off with just a
couple members of staff who would then
reach out to people who seemed to show
good taste or good judgment website say
hey would you mind if we give you this
role just like being a moderator and you
can then nominate or post things to this
hashtag so it appears so I was really
intrigued by this and I started looking
into it and of course what I found was
that most people believe this was
meritocracy most people believed that if
you made a joke and it appeared in the
humor hashtag and then many thousands of
people saw it or at least many hundreds
of people saw did this really reflected
some
on your part with the joke and of course
many people had this view that it was
just like lightning striking in the
middle of a field that it was something
random and unexpected now 27 thousand
views in two days is a lot of views but
it's really significant to note that the
number of views he has in the videos
before and after are dramatically lower
just about 1,000 people 1,200 people so
on and so forth right and if you take a
look at this his lowest performing
videos per video with the fewest views
of a week ago that gives you a sense of
the size of his core audience so how
many people will watch every video he
uploads assuming it's a kind of normal
video that's on topic only 675 works so
I'm not saying this to criticize the guy
at all I'm nothing against him nothing
against this channel okay there is no
way I can look at this channel and think
that it's a quote unquote organic
phenomenon there's no way I can look at
this channel and think that it's a kind
of spontaneous or random phenomenon one
that this this particular video just one
of his videos in this series got 27,000
views in less than two days whereas all
the other videos he's put up for for
more than a month before that so we're
looking here at a month worth of uploads
that they're all just reaching small
numbers of viewers right and then
there's one video sensor and moreover
this one video appears on the front page
my front page when I'm using YouTube I
have never played zelda breath of the
WHA never in my life I have never owned
a Nintendo switch I've never used a
Nintendo switch there's no reason why
this one video would appear for me and
if if in general his channel were doing
well in terms of the so-called algorithm
this impersonal automatic system of
computing numbers then one of those
other videos would have shown up on my
on my feet before I would have would
have seen on the front page before so I
think we live in an era when people have
a bit of a comforting delusion that the
difference between success and failure
here on YouTube is either some kinds of
some kind of in trends
personal merit or is just random like
lightning striking that there's an
algorithm there's a there's a you know
magical machine that's crunching numbers
and selecting these videos on an unknown
and impersonal basis on my channel I
think I think in the history of this
channel I have only once had a video go
above 100,000 views and this is the
suspicious part that video went over a
hundred thousand views instantly like in
just a couple of days huge number of
viewers right away my channel is very
small there's no organic explanation for
that the other videos have had that had
many many views like more than ten
thousand views I could see that it was
organic I could see the process of
people finding the view and it took time
to give an example I have a video that
gave advice on how to do well on an
intelligence test specific intelligence
test and the link was first shared on
one discussion forum and a few people
came and then it was sure but in another
discussion forum and at first you got
some negative feedback people didn't
like the video and then over time people
shared the link Pete other people were
writing the test it was consistently
gaining an audience but not not
overnight I could see that was organic
from person to person okay YouTube is
not a meritocracy and it's not the
product of a mindless algorithm when you
come on YouTube you are looking at
curated content the advertisements that
appear to you on Facebook in your feed
likewise are not random sure there's
some role for an algorithm in in making
the work of employees at Facebook more
efficient so they can employ a smaller
number of people and they can make the
decisions more rapidly and so on and so
forth sure but when we're looking at
success on YouTube now when we're
looking at videos that get tens of
thousands of views in shorter time that
just happen to appear on the front page
of YouTube it's not happening right
human beings are making those decisions
and sometimes sometimes they're making
those decisions for political reasons I
do believe that in the case of Faraday
speaks who's a nice guy
I think his one video went viral the
first video he uploaded when he had zero
followers on YouTube
I believe that went viral I believe that
was promoted and it appeared on my on my
front page appeared on so many polls
from page I believe that was promoted
initially as an intentional decision
made by some editor some curator at
YouTube the same way an editor of a
newspaper chooses an article to put it
some friends on the front page and they
did that because it had a political
message that was about YouTube they
wanted to promote in my video my video
that went to over a hundred thousand
views so quickly so suspiciously that
video also had a specific message about
YouTube a message that YouTube wanted to
promote
[Music]